so without further Ado could everybody
give a big round of applause for Mr Gene
Youngblood
I first want to say it's an honor for me
to be with you
I mean that sincerely
um the Leading Edge or Crest if you will
of a wave the art and Technology wave
I've been writing all my adult life
professionally quote as a theorist since
1968.
so I'm truly uh delighted to be here
and hear your ideas I have some ideas
that I hope are relevant to your ideas
this is about taking things seriously
to take something seriously is to make
it your way of being in the world period
let's say that again to take something
seriously is to make it your way of
being in the world nothing less
I know that a lot of us do take certain
things seriously I'm going to mention
here and it's and we don't make it our
way of being in the world because we
don't know how
things are that way these days aren't
they well I'm going to try to give you
uh share with you some ideas I've been
working on all my life about how to do
that given this
really
breathtaking moment what I think of
where we stand now is kind of the hinge
of History
uh
very breathtaking hinge of history that
may in fact literally take our breath
away I don't think there's anyone in
this room has not is not familiar with
that
thought that idea so we'll be addressing
that I didn't realize actually that this
was sort of going to be Bucky day but
since it is that's that's terrific
um and since gray area invokes Bucky's
idea of World game in the in the
literature I I thought I'd start with
that
we're going to go into these two words
extensively later but I just want to say
that but Mr Fuller was a utopian radical
to me those two words summarize what he
was for me
all of those other things design
scientists all great no problem but his
legacy for me what
the fire that burned in my life ever
since
it's been wanting to be a utopian
radical
um we're very familiar with this
people you see that in people's
signatures and their emails and so on
and that's you know I like that
uh I would like to suggest and I think
it's obvious
probably everybody in this room
thinks they are or would like to be
proposing that model
and I want to point out that uh
the
the archetypal utopian vocation is
precisely the Builder of models
so in that sense you're all utopians
it's more serious than that actually so
we'll get into that
the title of the talk the build
creating on the same scale as we can
destroy
that's what World game has always meant
to me
another way of putting it is
to imagine at scale
and I think a lot of the presentations
I've seen here today unfortunately
couldn't be here yesterday are begging
that question how do we imagine at scale
some of you many of you do imagine at
scale and the work that you do is things
that are here today are exactly that
and imagining at scale is the absolutely
First Essential step if we're going to
create on the same scales we can destroy
and I think that phrase that I just said
which by the way is not mine and we'll
get into that later is also
the question that is begged by all of
our work
and it's the it's the desire that we
have
and we know that we better do it or
things are going to get seriously tough
and can we do it
back in the early days 1970s began
working closely with Bucky and the world
game people I want to emphasize that
from the very instant
I saw what I was going to do in the
world which was keep building or
proposing or theorizing models of
communication
that would enable this thing
what you know I don't care if you call
it World game you know that was a
positive sum game and we all we all know
about that
again I just want to say whether it's
ever called World game it simply doesn't
matter to me we know that's what we have
to do
this is why Buck is so he you know his
popularity is really exciting to me
because I can't think of one person from
that era
as Visionary and prescient as this man
was one person who you want to keep
repeating these amazing quotes and
Visions so anyway uh it fired me up from
the beginning and uh
from the beginning this is what I
thought would lead to the ability to
quote play World game that is to say
imagine at scale this is what was going
to be necessary
this is me calling for a national
information utility in 1974.
what we need to do in this country and
in fact in all advanced industrial
Nations is to have what you might call a
national information utility this would
be a utility like any other gas water
electricity and so on the main
difference being that the services are
Goods or vital necessity that this
utility would provide to the public
would be access to information specified
by the user
and access to Communications channels
controlled by the user
education networks are what most people
know is cable TV
program retrieval system that is video
cassette and video disc players
remote access computer utilities or
time-shared computers
domestic communication satellites
the plan of analysis or resource
satellite and finally what you might
call new information display systems for
the home
taken as components of a single greatest
whole system they have the potential of
completely inverting
the organizing principle now embodied in
the structure and function of the mass
media that is the principle of
centralized one-way map audience
non-adaptive perceptual imperialism
message distribution so as it is
Manifest in the structure and function
of Television radio newspapers in the
cinema the national information utility
embodies a an organizing principle who
exactly the
end of the industrial organized
organized one-way math audience
non-adaptive perceptual
principle is one of decentralized
two-way special audience user controls
feedback communication systems
it is an effect a cybernetic system
which can allow conscious control of our
socio-cultural Revolution because of
these profound implications and and
impact of these tools and
their
employment
a narrow manner may have very serious
consequences and therefore the national
information utility must be supported by
public funds and operated as a common
care of Public Utilities whereas now the
user of the mass media is considered the
passive receiver of
and therefore the mass media cultivate
for output and authority to cultivate
more demand
and the user is seen as a passive
receiver and an inversion of that would
be where the user of a decentralized
two-way special audience user controls
system the user would be
factors of input
our perception of what is possible is
shaped by our perception of the of
alternative models
by inverting the
Indian principle by surrounding
ourselves with
with the kind of value systems to which
we subscribe for the first time then
aesthetic
FedEx coming very closely
user control of information environment
and user-controlled aesthetic models of
alternative ways of making the world
work and alternative material and
cultural realities
and then conducting dialogue and
arriving at consensus on these various
alternative propositions it seems to me
the one of the most profound aesthetic
and political possibilities learning
nation has ever had before
power of the people you you may uh some
of you may be familiar with this book by
Tim Wu
uh 36 years after my talk those it's in
2010 and I may I mean no disrespect at
all to this man he's great in which he
calls it the separation principle that's
what you know what I was saying but but
not in those words in other words
vertical integration of those Industries
rather than horizontal otherwise you
don't have a democratic system if you
don't do that and I just want to say I
was not alone
you know and uh later we'll
see some more evidence of I was not
alone he shows in this book historically
what he calls the the information
industry and again I look
it isn't about access to information
it's about access to people
access to community
if you go if you think access to
information that's what you're going to
get information
if you think access to community you're
going to get both
the community and the information they
generate
like this is Hobby
never ever ever say the information
revolution you know the information
Highway that is not what it's about
um I would even say you know using that
term is to buy into our own oppression
you know it just it just we're not there
we're not part of that agency it's just
information
and so anyway Tim who says will the
internet follow the same fate as these
as all these other Industries you know
where he said uh invention begets
industry and Industry begets Empire
think about the the thoughts we've heard
today and yesterday uh which basically
say that or at least you know allude to
it or beg that question
invention begets industry and Industry
begets Empire will the internet follow
the same fate will it come to be ruled
by a corporate Leviathan in possession
of the master switch
a Battle Royal for the internet's future
is brewing and this is one war we dare
not tune out I'm quoting from him well
I'm just saying with no disrespect
whatsoever we've known that
for a long long time
it should not come as news to anyone in
this room
do you take it seriously remember it was
that to take something seriously is to
make it your way of being in the world I
think you would love
to make it your way of being in the
world and I think that many of the
projects and models the same models have
been presenting here are exactly that
your your attempt to make that
what you take so seriously being your
way of being in the world and you know
it and you're doing it
and that's why I'm honored to be with
you
here's uh okay so that lecture you saw
uh was 1974.
four years earlier 1970 uh here's
another here's my Call to Arms
the media must be liberated must be
room private owners ship and Commercial
sponsorship must be placed in the
service of all Humanity we must make the
media believable we must assume
conscious control over the video sphere
we must wrench the intermediate Network
free from the archaic and corrupt
intelligence that now dominates it
now this amazing and startling statement
was made by Gene Youngblood in a journal
called radical software in the summer of
1970. we could look at this and listen
to this today as if it were just written
so I point out that I was saying that I
wasn't alone I mean that after all that
was published a journal dedicated to the
subject right so it's like it was a
Zeitgeist you know it was ambient now
that's what a lot of people who we
we admire or or or move us they
articulate we already know you know we
know that that's what Bucky did for a
lot of us and uh so yeah I was able to
do that and people say well Gene did
that but I
it's really important for young people
today people today working at this to
know that there's a history
not not because it you know shows you
you don't know anything but it shows
you're on the right path you know
history is on your side
and we need to know these things
and you know uh
this you see here was the beginning of
media activism the whole uh you know
media democracy movement started in that
in that Zeitgeist right along with Bucky
Fuller about his ideas and I never
stopped I'm still building
theoretically the better model I don't
consider myself a theorist anymore I
consider myself a utopian radical we get
more into that
and my idea of that model keeps getting
more sophisticated and rolling with the
times and with the reality these days
and that's what this talk is about
okay gray area
leads you to this article I wrote called
a secession from the broadcast first uh
paragraph This is four years ago by the
way this is this is an essay which is a
transcription of a lecture I did four
years ago some of the breathtaking image
of the multitude pouring into streets
and plazas around the world and millions
to demonstrate against tyranny now
imagine instead they're demanding a free
and open internet the likelihood of that
is almost zero we would agree
that's interesting but why is that what
would have to happen to make that
utopian spectacle reality
what Insurgent algorithm would get us
from here to there what I'm going to do
right now is refer to this sort of the
UR text I'm proud of it it's one of the
best things I've written on the subject
but four years ago and I keep thinking
and The World Keeps evolving so I'm
gonna periodically quote the text and
then comment on it four years later
today's reality and then uh throw in a
few uh little Snippets of text uh uses
of language that I that I'm doing now
okay
okay the first thing is that I wouldn't
say it that way anymore the way that
the way that is today I would say
imagine we were demanding
a worldwide socialized toll-free public
internet as a global nervous system for
planetary survival
that other one was like low of a chance
there's a zero
possibility of what I just said and that
that word worldwide is the key there
that simply is not going to happen and
that's not good news but we know it
never will
no possibility of that and the odds are
near zero even of some of the toll-free
socialized public utility internet
happening and even one one country such
as Iris and I'm I propose that if we
don't do that
our chances of creating at the same
scales we can destroy are
very thin
I would love for someone to prove me
wrong on that one
I mean think about it the internet but
which by the way I'm using here but what
I really want to say is the digital
condition
what we're all talking about is the
digital condition at which you might say
the internet is at the center
but it's you know to say that is
limiting the Internet it's the digital
condition all the stuff we see going on
here isn't necessarily the internet but
it is the digital condition what what
that enables
and you know notice
even if you even if they're not talking
about you know how the internet should
be regulated the Internet isn't even
mentioned
and and current discourse is about in
excuse me infrastructure oh oh it's
potholes and we need new Bridges
the very thing the internet which could
enable it which could accelerate and
enable all of this isn't even it doesn't
exist in public discourse and certainly
not by any people trying to be president
right
let me uh point something out here
this this a language ecosocial nervous
system okay
back 52 years ago Marshall mcluhan
influenced us all at that time and how
could he not uh understanding media the
extensions of man no women just men and
uh
you know that was the idea uh certain
Technologies are extension of the body
our physical capabilities others which
he was interested in was was extensions
of the mind of the nervous system right
for a while you know people my
generation and me too I kind of put that
down it's like I forgot about it oh yeah
you know the world nervous system that's
isn't that a little uh
I don't know kind of new AG or something
uh but lo and behold
we come back full circle almost to where
in my mind this is the central way this
is the way to look at this situation
so I think I've covered
most of these here symmetrical emotional
bandwidth going to get to later
into an encryption I assume I'll let you
know what that is and so the two things
we're going to get to later is
symmetrical emotional bandwidth and
translocal social heterotopias this is
not technobabble I assure you and you
will
you will uh I hope you will agree when
we get to that
all right
I take that very seriously and so
it really brings up the question how do
we think things we think things through
language right you know uh
thought is made
in the mouth
and so
I want to start
with some language that um
that essay
secession from the broadcast
I'm gonna
talk about the broadcast today we have
the digital condition
and we have the internet
the broadcast whatever you that may mean
is I think not something you would
immediately associate with the internet
the broadcast is what's going away
gradually uh centralized mass
communication
I think now is the time to kind of um
elaborate on this word expand this word
uh because now we have something
that the broadcast is not
which allows us to see what the
broadcast is or what that phrase could
mean
in a very politically potent manner I
think
I'm going to get to uh momentarily the
next slide um
the the uh you know the sort of the base
of what everyone would think oh
broadcast Oh you mean media that's the
media yeah we're talking about the media
yeah and we'll do that we'll talk about
that but I think of this term as having
many levels so there you are the media
then the next step you will see is uh
the structure you know the structures
behind it and the next step is sort of
larger and larger and as I go through
and uh and and go through those steps
you'll see what I mean but basically it
ends up with civilization
I think of the broadcast as civilization
itself
and then what does that mean
it means us
the civilization isn't here we carry it
and that has really important
consequence okay let's start at a basic
level the medium and this is from the
text
the broadcast is All State media their
institutional infrastructure their
political economy the culture they
create and the social control the
culture serves through the socialization
it administers
the broadcast is All State media you
would say corporate media but let's be
consistent this is from the textile we
live in a corporate State and corporate
media our state media that's been
understood at least since the early 20th
century
in a democracy government must rely on
corporate media instead of State
Ministries to disseminate State
propaganda it's like what else
corporate media our state media just as
the private banking cartel known as the
Federal Reserve is a State Bank their
state media Justice Exxon Mobil is a
state oil company
and we know that privatized State media
are more effective than nationalized
media precisely because they're not seen
as state media
so folks never say corporate media
always say State media when you're
talking about that component of the
broadcast
the co-partnership of American media and
the state is a Triumph of what Sheldon
wolin calls inverted totalitarianism in
his Incredible Book democracy
Incorporated
everyone should read that 10 times we're
the Showcase of how democracy can be
managed without appearing to be
suppressed
the American people are victims of the
most successful psychological operation
ever inflicted on a national population
the most sophisticated propaganda
campaign any regime has ever deployed
against his own citizens
so never say the media aren't doing
their job
they are doing their job
we aren't doing ours
and their job is to make sure of that
their job is to manufacture non-citizens
now I'm going to make so that's the text
right four years ago now I'm going to
make a little comment on that
when we say we live in a corporate state
we're not talking about corporations
we're talking about the state
the problem is not corporations not ever
the problem is always in every case the
state whose laws sanction corporate
tyranny and plunder it's all legal
unless it's not
and even then they get away with it
I understand what it's saying here laws
this is the law we're talking about the
state you don't go after the
corporations you go after the state
so continuing on with that text the
social control the broadcast serves it's
based on controlling the social
construction of realities
more accurately the broadcast controls
the contexts in which realities are
socially constructed and culturally
Affirmed as Herbert Marcus would say I
want to emphasize controlling the
contexts in which that happens because
control of context is control of reality
context is everything everything is
context and the broadcast is the meta
context for everything
Here Comes
important point it has the power to
Define for most people most of the time
and any politically relevant sense the
four basic dimensions of reality
existence priorities values and
relations existence what's real and
what's not
priorities oh it's important and what's
not values what's good or bad right or
wrong and how they're related
let's say
a lot of people a lot of speakers are
sort of dancing around that idea we
questions have been asked here of course
you know it's the old uh
if you're a hammer everything's a nail
and that's how I see these things but
it's up to you decide if your desires
fit into this who gets to define those
things that politically relevant scale
who's excluded from conversations that
establish understandings and agreements
at that scale because there's no power
greater than that
the power to control the social
construction of realities that is to say
the conditions of meaning is the
ultimate power
like all cultures the broadcast is a
technology of the self I take that from
Michel Foucault and twist it a little
bit
um
every culture is a technology of the
self right it's it's in which we
construct ourselves and in this case in
the broadcast image
everything we think feel desire and do
or don't do
results from our living in it we are who
we are and therefore civilization is
what it is
because we internalize those
understandings and agreements we become
the place we live in
we're not born in the world the world is
born in US
so that's generally what I mean by the
broadcast in the uh in the test that
goes on from many pages and uh
I think you should read this uh so
that's a broadcast next is this
breathtaking hinge of history that I
mentioned at the beginning
that for 40 years I have called the
global ecosocial crisis
four World historic events converge
right now
for us this is our time
breathtaking
and again uh internet as soon as I get
home I'm going to change this and just
say the digital condition with the
understanding of the internet at the
center of it now take a look at that
what what is what does that tell us
well one thing it tells us that we live
we live right now in Futures that have
come to pass
right
apocalypse and Utopia
apocalypse not expected so soon
ecological Holocaust
and the rise of the digital condition
which I call Utopia and will
expand on that more
now look at that
any single one of these by itself would
throw civilization into crisis
and uh
you might say well why why the internet
we'll get into that together
they constitute a challenge the
challenge to create on the same scale as
we can destroy that
well first of all we can't imagine it
really and I'm trying to help us imagine
that but it may well be insurmountable
but it doesn't help to dwell on that so
what
I want to go to another Bucky quote here
before we get into looking at each one
of these pieces
whether we're able to be a complete
success or failure
is in such critical balance that every
smallest human test of Integrity every
smallest moment-to-moment decision tips
the scales affirmatively or negatively
isn't that not one aspect of where we
are today don't we know this isn't it I
mean we're this is a critical hinge of
History this is very serious business
and I know that we would love to make
that our way of being in the world
and I'm trying to suggest one Avenue one
thing that might lead to that but let's
let's define going to Define some of
these things first one
ecological Holocaust now I I know that
what I'm going to say here you all know
this but I I feel like it's necessary
and I for 40 years I've used this term
ecosocial system it seemed to me so
obvious
naturally colleges and human ecologies
are both ecologies you can't separate
them
and so you have an ecosocial system the
integration of human and natural
ecologies on a planetary scale biosphere
and civilization constitute a single
structure that's hardly a new idea this
is from the text except now we're forced
to take it seriously make it our way of
being in the world and that coupling
the natural environment becomes a built
environment
and in the case of GMOs for example
organisms become ideological structures
it's the ultimate expression of what
Jurgen habermas calls capitalist
colonization of the life world
so this litany yeah if you heard a
billion times planetary heating notice I
don't say global warming planetary
heating has a little more bite I think
the water food and energy crises mass
extinctions ocean dead zones Arctic
meltdown overpopulation Mega
urbanization and the pollution and I
might say disease that it generates of
everything on and on all racing in slow
motion toward what Bruce damer calls the
great crescendo
the time wave is gathering momentum and
so is the chaos that rides it not only
peak oil but Peak peace
civilization grows meaner by the day and
it's only beginning
and this is the world in which we're
going to create on the same scale as we
can destroy
Okay so
those are my comments on that part of
the thing now
um
ah I can't go back take those two
together capitalist globalization and
the end of democracy okay
I went
I want to explain that and
do that this way make an important
distinction
and this is I think crucial between
globalization and capitalist globalism
globalization is a world economy in
which capital accumulation proceeds
gradually throughout the world man named
Emmanuel wallerstein is the father of
globalization theory in that sense in
other words the world is
what what Commerce is the world is the
scale of Commerce at any given
historical moment the world that doesn't
mean the globe
so it proceeds historically and uh it's
a historical process it existed in the
west at least since the 16th century in
other words it's not this is not a bad
thing it's inevitable how could this not
happen right
however
capitalist globalism a global economy is
something different it's an economy with
the capacity to work as a unit okay I'm
gonna say
an economy with the capacity to work as
a unit in real time on a planetary scale
to say that that's historically new
reality is a massive understatement
that's breathtaking
and that's the world we live in
and one of the things it means and I
would say as a union globally in real
time one of the things that means if
there is a collapse
the world system collapses as a whole
because it is now
there will be no second chance
it's collapsed
that's now that's
one of the things one of the challenges
we're talking about when we talk about
imagining at scale creating at scale
we have to meet that
that's the scale and velocity that we
have to imagine working at
and you know it's it's obviously it's
the end of democracy you know neoliberal
capitalism has laminated the planet that
it's it's the exact opposite of anything
you could even remotely call democracy
and we see this happening all over the
world democracies
collapsing everywhere and uh you know
becoming uh
oligarchies and so on okay from the text
here we are now the internet digital
condition why is that in there what do
we have to say about that
consider the breathtaking historical
Coincidence of on the one hand the
failure of democracy around the world
even as the ecological Holocaust races
in slow motion towards tipping points
and on the other hand the simultaneous
rise as if on demand of the one thing
that might enable a worldwide effort to
prevent crisis from becoming catastrophe
or at least catastrophe not greater than
it's already guaranteed to be
if the internet didn't exist we'd have
to invent it to even begin to imagine
what creating at scale might mean
so thank God it's here but there's a
problem
the communication Revolution can't be
allowed to happen because it's a mortal
threat to the institutions of
civilization that precipitated the
eco-social crisis in the first place now
I want to say here
the the uh so the communication
Revolution can't be allowed to happen
a communication I'm going to go in this
later in Greater detail a communication
Revolution is the decentralization and
pluralization of the social construction
of reality
say that again a Communications
Revolution is the decentralization and
pluralization of the social construction
of reality
that can't be allowed because you can
see instantaneously that's the end of
the dominating system
the whole thing is whoever he said the
broadcast that's its power to control in
an Imperial Way
existence priorities values and
relations there's you know that's it if
you lose that you're down and that's
exactly what is happening now and it's
why the NSA has no choice
but surveillance it's all they know it's
all they've got
foreign
the cultural institutions of
civilization the cultural Institutes of
civilization I call the broadcast and it
follows that secession from the
broadcast leaving the culture without
leaving the country
is the necessary's first step toward
creating on the same scale as we can
destroy if you ascribe these problems to
this the culture and again
on one you know on the national level
what does what do you mean by the
culture well it's obviously the only one
we share in common such that we such I
could say the word and you know what I'm
talking about neoliberal culture
consumer culture whatever the hell I say
it's it's our local you know the local
franchise of civilization
okay
you know doing that leaving it then is
the necessary first step to even begin
to think creating a scale and the
breathtaking fact is that the internet
the digital condition actually does
enable secession at that scale
which is why it's very existence throws
civilization into crisis so that's one
one way
it's the end of centralized mass media
and the social control that depends on
it
we'll talk about the social control
that's a big point
there was no exit no outside before
now there is now there are unlimited
Alternatives at global scale we've been
hearing ideas about that as I said days
we're no longer held against our will
we're no longer trapped inside the
signal constrained by the code
the broadcast knowledge sanctions are
lifted were released from cognitive
lockdown although you wouldn't know that
by looking at people's behavior these
days
secession from dominant culture at the
scale now possible means collapse of
social control as we know it in Liberal
democracies we want it to collapse
because it drives the crisis but that
creates another crisis that compounds
the apocalypse the other crisis isn't a
loss of social control
what the contrary it's the metastasizing
security and surveillance State a
lawless cyber panopticon with terrifying
powers of totalitarian control that's
the second reason the internet throws
civilization into crisis
now again I want to make this point
the NSA understood as Dominator Society
has no choice
because if the internet
enables either totalitarian control or
utopian Freedom if they don't
really push on maintaining totalitarian
control over the thing the people will
do exactly the opposite
what will they do exactly the opposite
what I'm calling the build they're going
to start imagining at scale
self-consciously self-referentially
and I'm going to make sure they do
that's mine task in life
um which is to say going on the text
that the cultural arm of social control
in America the cultural arm of control
there are other kinds of course
is now based exclusively on a mass
identification
the culture that's not enforceable
the very existence of this apparatus
that enables Millions to systematically
disidentify with the American imaginary
to willfully estrange ourselves from the
master signifier America
that's a new menace to social control
and they are not going to ignore it it's
cointelpro forever
I want to uh
now that's the text I'm going to comment
I say
the cultural arm of social control and
Essay the cultural arm of control there
are other kinds of course well yeah
economics law all that stuff we know but
the way I look at it culture is behind
all of those things
culture you might in this Frame culture
is desire
well somebody desires those economics
those laws capitalism and all of that or
they wouldn't be there the domineers and
they create a world which which allows
it to be there so desire Consciousness
the way we think the world the way we
think power is behind all of this stuff
so I say culture is all of it
and with the understanding of how you
would you know Nuance those things
um
and I frankly to me it's jaw-dropping to
realize what a house of cards the
Imperium has become how tenuous the base
for social control is in America today
I'll unsound are its Moorings how
precariously it rests on a gamble that
the audience Nation won't change its
mind
well maybe we won't but the positive the
point is the possibility is there on a
scale that should terrify the dominators
and exactly what they can do about it
beyond the futile intimidation of
surveillance
is far from obvious and it is futile
so
we the people of the audience Nation
face a challenge for which nothing in
past experience has prepared us we've
known that for decades so one might
reasonably ask are we really the ones
we've been waiting for
do we do we really possess the radical
will that can come only from us
there's not much evidence of it America
is one of the most depoliticized nations
in the industrial world we live in the
land of Look Away T.S Eliot said the
world ends not with a bang but a whimper
if only it would be so dramatic given
the level of distraction in America it's
more likely the last incident of History
will go by unnoticed
so it turns out not that not that we
didn't always know it that the ego
social crisis is first and foremost a
crisis of Will and idea
a crisis of confidence and Imagination
the expected result of our socialization
in the broadcast I mean if you take
seriously how powerful it is what do you
think we're all severely damaged and
that you know that's a good thing we
need to recognize that you can't you
know deal with a disease if you haven't
diagnosed it
I mean severely damaged here we are you
know and total planetary emergency and
basically we can't imagine what to do
about it if that isn't damaged I don't
know what is
so
which means that creating on the same
scale as we can destroy begins with
recreating ourselves right as
imaginative beings
re-socializing ourselves to become the
kind of people who would be capable of
mobilizing radical will on the scale
that's needed
we need Mass radicalization I'm gonna
I'm gonna go into that in a moment Mass
radicalization
how do we imagine that
and how do we do that how do we awaken
the radical will that sleeps within us
the answer to this immemorial question
is found in what I call the utopian myth
of a communication Revolution that's
what I was talking about the beginning
uh but before uh before I explain it we
need to get into this idea about utopian
radical
going back to Mr Fuller
and uh going on to Oscar Wilde
map but the world doesn't include Utopia
is not worth glancing at leaves out the
one country at which humanity is always
Landing
now
this is really important to me if I'm
going to use these words as it has to be
a reason
both those words refer to in their
separate ways transformation at the root
that is they're both radical from the
Latin Radix root
so I'm saying to you Utopia is the
desire for transformation at the root
radical
is acting upon that desire
actively trying to transform the root
think about
those classic kind of you know fanciful
Utopias of
of Moore Hobbes and lock these perfect
worlds you know but first of all let me
say
to to think of Utopia as Some Kind of
Perfect World never ever ever do that
first of all
Utopia is a desire it's not a place it's
not a kind of world it's simply a desire
no desire is ever naive
only its expectations are naive
um but but think about them
the interesting thing
as Frederick Jameson points out
uh is that they leap to the
post-revolutionary utopian condition
here we are in this
utopian world and by the way when we say
it's a desire
for what
if you really look at it think about it
utopian desire is the desire for release
from hierarchy
how could any world be desirable still
retaining this where there are
dominators where there is no equality
right
in other words democracy
so Utopia is the desire for democracy
right
so but here we are in those worlds with
no suggestion whatsoever of how we got
there
we're just there
and what's left out is that axial moment
that break with history
what would have to have happened to get
us there into that
into that Democratic World hardly
perfect
and that's the beauty of those old
standard Utopias we're forced to supply
the break
we're forced to imagine what would have
to happen
so we're gonna I'm gonna get back on
that several times
in other words what would be the
Insurgent algorithm that got us there in
the first place
um
and so
again to repeat that Utopia is the
desire for democracy just
release from hierarchy and radical is
the acting on it to try to enable that
to bring it about so I want to say never
ever ever
use those words in a negative pejorative
way that's collaboration and our
oppression at the very root never ever
we got to change we gotta you know
recuperate those words and change the
way we think those things because
if you understand what I've been saying
about the ecosocial crisis you
understand that every conceivable
solution to the ecosocial crisis is a
utopian solution transformation at the
root listen to everyone in the world is
calling for that people would say the
system isn't working what do you mean by
System
that's the root it's if it's systemic
you're talking about the root
you don't reform it
uh and so in that sense you know
to trash Utopia
you mean how dare you do that
and then while you're talking on and on
and on about democracy the most utopian
of all dreams
it just
that's one of the ways in which you're
damaged
so they both mean the same thing they're
redundant in that sense never ever
request equate radical will with extreme
let me put this another way
if in fact the ecosystem crisis is a
systemic root crisis and therefore it
needs to be needs transformation at the
root and that radicals are the ones who
are going to attempt to do that
what does that mean that means radicals
are are the heroes of our time for
really no I'm not talking about radical
you understand like commies or you know
that stuff
going for the root whatever we say it
may be and I you know I I think it's
capitalist globalism the neoliberal uh
laminating of the planet
but
point being
that if you're not a radical today
you're in the way you know you're you're
inhibiting something that we have to do
and what we have to do it you know if we
say we need to become the kind of people
who do this we're saying Mass
radicalization
but notice how our heads you know
there's that tug back to the way we're
socialized oh wow we're Mass
radicalization Jesus that's bad [__]
never ever ever
do that
there is nothing and I mean nothing
radical in what we are talking about
here radicals work at oil companies if
you wake up in the morning to make your
hundred thousand dollars a day you're
willing to alter the chemical
composition of the atmosphere then
you're engaged in a more radical act
than anyone who ever came before you
I want to um
go to this beautiful quote
from Hannah Arendt one of my heroes
so we're talking about creating a scale
imagining it at scale
Hana or rent says that in order to do
that we need a certain kind of freedom
the capacity to call something into
being which did not exist before which
was not given not even as an object of
cognition or imagination and which
therefore strictly speaking could not be
known
isn't that what that's the same thing we
mean when we say crisis of imagination
and it's the same thing which which the
dominators cannot ever permit to happen
bring that new thing bringing that new
thing that could not be known into
knowingness is it's the end of them and
they're going to fight that to the death
so
I said that this is going to lead us to
the utopian myth of a communication
Revolution
and you know what I mean by that you
heard the the call for the national
quote information utility
what I'm about to show you the next
couple of slides I've lifted from this
article Road in a co-evolution uh
quarterly 1977
and uh what I mentioned earlier about
desire the control of Desire
so in there I lifted just for this talk
all those years ago these two uh
contrasts
so I say that on a technical level
a communication Revolution purely on a
technical level it's not the one that
matters
is you these two things centralized
these are
oh and we all have seen this a billion
times point one it has been done this is
the reality today
there's no doubt about that
um
it would reflect a paradigm shift in our
heads as as an audience Nation
this this kind of shift right dominated
partnership hierarchy to heter hierarchy
heteronomy that is other law to autonomy
self-law
communication versus conversation and
from control to coherence coherence as
the result conversation I want to point
out
uh you know we're calling for this
National information utility in other
words that um the technical model
is only the possibility of a
communication Revolution what it needs
is policy what's missing from that is
the policy that would
think it organize it
and legalize it according to these
values
in other words the nation the government
or whoever would have to actually say oh
this is really cool let's do that
right
the state would have to explicitly
endorse and embrace these principles and
write them into law
but this
is not the revolution
but secession from the broadcast is
still possible right we're in one I call
the paleo-cybernetic phase of all this
so let's
get into it I want to introduce you to
some other Heroes of mine
not only Heroes but actual mentors that
I worked with and who influenced my life
greatly uh Beyond Bucky
so Bucky certainly did
he was a hinge of history for me
but there were others Humberto macharana
and Heinz Von Forester together in a
certain complex way the founders if you
will of what is now called second order
systems theory the cybernetics of
cybernetics
and along with them
this is a back in the 1977 Francisco
Varela died some quite some years ago
who's actually the one in my
conversations with him brought about
what we're just going to talk about and
also one that's not in here Gordon pask
hailed in the in the cybernetic world as
one of the great theorists and his thing
of conversation Theory
I highly recommend you reading these
reading this stuff this field is very
powerful
radical autonomies is what I
took away from it way back since that
article 77 is at least the idea of
autonomous reality communities what that
is really what that really is about
that's the foundation for decentralizing
and pluralizing the social construction
of reality
from my conversations with those guys
and Cisco in particular
came to understand the importance of
conversations from the Latin Converse
sorry to turn around together it's
generative right conversation is
degenerative it brings forth worlds it's
how we construct realities existence
priorities foundation and all that stuff
we can talk about things because we
generate the things we talk about by
talking about them
that's a closure right that's autonomy
we become a reality community
right you talk the things uh the Latin
res res basis of the word reality
and the closure the circularity of that
cultural autonomy right
turning around together seals our
cultural autonomy we become an
autonomous reality community
now that's what we usually mean by
virtual community right but
virtual is irrelevant so what how you do
it it's not irrelevant it's about scale
that virtuality enables it to go to
scale I say reality Community because
they're virtual not physical because
they're atopias without topology
defined not by physical space but mental
space not by geography but by
Consciousness ideology and desire and
like all communities a reality Community
exists as long as the conversations that
constituted exist and no longer
now that phrase has actually redundant
because there's no other kind of
community every Community is an
autonomous reality community that brings
forth the things it talks about by
talking about them in other words every
Community is a conspiratorial
conversation that generates the
realities that Define it as a community
conspire to breathe together to turn
around together we breathe together to
turn around together right
I realize all this is kind of an
abstract level but I hope
you see yourself in it not going back to
this
this model and going back to my my work
as as a model builder a utopian builder
of models
what I mean by the build
that article was titled secession from
the broadcast that's about leaving
something right but when you leave one
thing you move toward another
and that other where you move toward
that's important you know to to Really
Leave the broadcast you have not left
the broadcast if you're not moving
towards something that is its opposite
right
so
I found language I like a lot from the
sociologists thank you Sarah life world
home World an alien world life world is
the the world that you as an individual
right now subjectively inhabit
and experience
as a lived experience at any instant
right so right now we're all this is our
life world this Auditorium and all that
if one of you was to walk out on the
foyer there your life world would change
would be different from ours in that
little tiny sense right so life world is
just it's a simple idea it's what you
subjectively experience at any instant
right now that's your life will you know
that there's a there's one out there
called the world and all that but okay
I uh at all my life been interested in
the idea of a media life world what is
your media life world before the
internet it was you know the networks
right it was the broadcast the Dominator
the perceptual imperialists that was the
media life world
uh then you know it started getting more
and more um diverse there were more
quote channels right but those channels
all said the same thing and so in a way
they weren't but what happened was you
know cable all that stuff I was in that
early lecture 74. but now I let cable
and all that stuff together suddenly we
had 500 channels but you know they were
all the same but you could
a symbol from that media life world your
own personal media Homeworld
now Hughes Earl didn't really mean that
he was talking about children actually
but he was talking about a child's life
world but I love that word I think it's
potent
now think to yourself what we actually
do today
from that huge media life world out
there we call the cloud or the commons
right
each of us is actively engaged in
building our personal media homeworlds
that this is not again not technobabble
that is actually what we're doing once
you think that you see that that is what
we're doing
and the the threat of the digital
condition to the dominators is that that
opens up the ability to first of all
seed the commons
with
materials which we then as individuals
download from the comments
and build media home worlds
which are whose whose elements you know
whose content is exactly coucher
to the imperatives of social control
this is why they're hysterical
I don't think they could say it to
themselves that way but that that's it
also had alien world he didn't mean that
negatively all he meant by that was the
other
I like it for the connotation we would
put on it
and uh
let me um
a little more about this life world
Homeworld
Alan K
some of you may know who he was a true
true Visionary of computer computers
Apple wouldn't exist without him
uh and he he said a computer is a meta
medium a tool for building tools meta
medium that's what coding is right
the media life world is also a meta
medium a social meta medium a tool for
building Technologies of the self
you think of it that way how to use it
consciously that way
so we go so the build
using the life world to build our home
worlds that are radical
the only thing you can control and you
must therefore control is the imagery in
your own mind
the problem is imagining how to do that
on scale
and having the resources to do it which
we now do
the build step one leave the culture
leave
that means you got to go somewhere else
and what we're doing these days is
building that somewhere else we don't
realize it people don't talk about it
that way but they're starting to I I
monitor these so-called alternative
media constantly every day for that
language to see are people kind of
edging towards this and they are believe
me they are but it's unconscious right
or some might argue that it's pretty
conscious
stop knowing the broadcast what that
that word knowing is really important
okay so we we see things right
television let's say television movies
we read texts so all the work the text
world we hear things everything that's
Audible
but all of them are Vehicles you may say
to knowing it's how we know so I've I've
started I think this word knowing is
really important uh so for example if
you took that seriously and you know
there might be a conversation like this
hey you know I was uh knowing CNN last
night and this guy said or you could say
this way
you know I was thinking CNN last night
and this woman said
now
let's get back to that Utopia there we
are at that imagine a world in which all
of us were saying that imagine everybody
in here you never said I was watching or
I was reading or I was listening you
said you know I was knowing I was
thinking that is a revolutionary mind
you'd be way up in a meta domain looking
down on the whole thing like
sociologists do that's why they're
Radical by definition
what would get us there
let's not leap over that axial moment
that's what the build is about
what would have to happen to bring about
a world in which everyone said the
broadcast and we know what we're talking
about that I was knowing and thinking
these things rather than using the
senses and everybody understood that the
world would be revolutionized you know
it to get to that point
I'm suggesting that the build what I
call the build building your your home
worlds
to enforce it building the home world
that you practice
transformation of the self and that way
we'll get more more to that
you know that quote from Epictetus the
only thing you can control and must
therefore control is the imagery in your
own mind this this addresses that
directly is it okay how are we going to
do that and how are we going to do it at
scale
step one now I'm talking hey this isn't
Theory by the way this is my lived
experience
has brought me to be able to talk about
this but but I just want to say
that leaving the broadcast
leaving to culture is hardly a new idea
these days and you can find it across
the Spectrum from this uh sort of
spiritual writer Thomas More care of the
self
becoming Renegades and planting seeds
for a new one is that not building a
better model of a culture
and then we have our friend Malcolm X
so as I say this is the need for this is
recognized Everywhere by the entire
spectrum of humanity uh this is a
current little language I'm playing with
I like this personally
what we're doing now
although we're not saying it and we're
kind of semi-conscious of it we are
assembling for Exodus
because as the the commons grows and
gets more self-aware as we get more
self-aware about drawing down from the
commons and building our own Radical
Media home worlds that are exactly
counter to the imperatives of social
control that's going to become more and
more obvious to it to us to people and
I'm trying to accelerate that this is my
work I'm trying to say excuse me look
what we're doing if we only do this
consciously you know you accelerate oh
I talked about
Mass radicalization right to become the
kind of people who who are capable and
willing of doing that thing which we so
desperately need to do
have the will
have the have the vision which is the
utopian Vision the desire and have the
action which is the radical action
radical transformation so number one
there are these six steps that I
I kind of realized what I was doing
here they are now this is a report this
is not Theory I'm telling you what I
went through I I looked back and I said
okay if I'm going to try to help people
understand this and you know point to a
certain Avenue what happened to me
and here's what I realized over here and
that's this is a period of many many
years
to to be able to realize this first of
all when you when you when you leave the
culture you got your media home world
you're using it as a technology of the
self to transform yourself into a you
told me radical first thing you got to
do is break your heart repeatedly
never stop breaking your heart
I think I don't have to go into that if
you look at the so-called alternative
media you see heartbreaking stuff all I
mean this is non-stop if you're looking
for it if it's there and part of the
build is to make that really intense you
know to to curate
and understand what are things that
would break your heart and I I've been
moved to tears
by some of the things I've known in this
way
so I don't think that needs to be
you know it's heartbreaking
cultivate feelings of impotence and and
futility okay this is really important
someone asked me why the hell would you
want to do that
isn't that debilitating okay here how
what does this mean
what we are seeing in this in this
conference
edge of the of
art and technology which by the way we
all know is the most potent Alliance you
could possibly imagine these days
amazing heartening inspiring incredible
thing what you what you realize
immediately is that we know how to do
this we can do this
we can create it at scale we got to
start fast but you you know you see the
Solutions in my God
the broadcast is keeping this from me
all you know and that's where the
impotence and futility comes
so I'm saying part of the build building
your media Homeworld is not just that
negative thing where you you know you
critique the broadcast and all that sort
of thing yes that's incredibly important
in other words reasons to leave it are
incredibly important but the place we're
going to we build the place it's like
lay down a path and walking you know the
build is that so
that's where all this beautiful
potential is call it utopian hell yes it
is it's about transformation at the root
every one of the presentations I'm a
senior is about that
and so
and and you know I'm talking about
feature films documentaries whatever I
don't care what it is get those out
there become aware that we are this
breathtaking hinge of History
the hinge swings both ways you know it's
open
and all that gorgeous stuff that you all
do is standing there it's closed
because the dominators just cannot if we
start doing that it's their end
they can't
allow this to happen they'll go down in
flames
well great let's light the match
that impotence and futility you're
pissed you know I really got that God
damn it I did you know this is amazing
why don't we hear this in conferences
like this we do hear it I mean I have
the feeling I just want to drop to my
knees on a public sidewalk and thank God
that this the richest the Majesty of the
human imagination is before us now it's
there if you are looking for it if you
have the eyes to see it it's there and
it's just incredibly moving it's it's
beautiful you see the lie about
ourselves that we're forced to live in
you know that we can't do this
okay so you're building your uh
Homeworld
and uh the The Next Step then is you got
to confront your fear because we're
we're all in the in the crosshairs of
the panopticon right I mean they're what
it's go and tellpro forever
they they know you're doing this I
actually came and you know I have some
visibility you know it's a little little
audience that listens to me now and then
and I thought [__] you know I think I'm
under some really potentier am I gonna
go on with this you know because I see
every day of what they do to people you
know
am I uh I'm too old to be tortured and
you know I just don't want to do that
and I really got frightened I thought
my whole life's work has led me to this
point and I'm gonna chicken out
I called up my friend Bart samian
because he's
he's out there you know he's invisible I
said David you know I'm really afraid
and you like you
you got you got some
some advice and all he said was it's
your choice
what else can I say
well I tell you I I lived with that that
image
and you know what happens it goes away
you live with it familiarize yourself
with it and it goes away and your fear
goes away
but I guarantee you well maybe you won't
reach that phase but I did
the next thing
is uh hope for yourself from Hope there
are many many quotes like hope is the
rope from which we all hang Margaret
Atwood as a species we're doomed by hope
or Friedrich Nietzsche in his story
about Pandora's Box hope is the greatest
of all evils as it prolongs the torment
of man
you know the last thing left in
Pandora's Box was hope right and I we
need to leave it there
Hope Springs Eternal and has to be
killed every time it shows up
now hope and radical are mutually
exclusive in that sense you understand
and here's I think for me uh
you know their music exclusive because
to live and hope is to live in the
future that's not radical you're not
going to transform anything if you're
thinking about that and for me I was
really struck by the way Derek Jensen
talks about it hope is a longing for a
future condition over which you have no
agency
a longing for a future you know it's
abdicated agency it means you're
essentially powerless
something and he says something
wonderful happens when you give up on
hope you realize you never needed it in
the first place
so you know I say freeing yourself from
Hope doesn't mean that you can't have
hope it just means that you're going to
do what you're going to do regardless
you know so there's no hope so what I'm
I'm a radical utopian and I'm doing this
you know the world there's no choice I
mean
you know it's like great
so why bother with hope
and then turn the outrage into the Rage
of radical will and I say channeled into
the build
that's what you should do with
theoretical will to the build
so you can imagine building these media
worlds you're going to make feature
films you're going to make big
documentaries and by the way those you
know this revolution of the documentary
that we're living in I mean that is
breathtaking I I I have hundreds of
these things I copy them every time
they're on and I watch them repeatedly
over and over and over that's what you
do in the broadcast right over and over
you're getting the same [__] all the
time with little tweaks in it
first of all these documentaries need
repeated viewing they're dense and
they're they're our in our time they're
long that's long-form journalism you
know the journalists freaked out some
years ago oh my God it's all over
[__] these these documentaries and
I'm sure you know many very very
powerful ones they are long-form
journalism and they're a hell of a lot
more fun than reading the New York Times
so
I want to focus on we know we can make
those long things I'm going to focus on
interstitials that's what that's the
space between programs or it's the
program break the interstitial what are
you going to see in the broadcast
capitalism consume consume consume
that's right and think about how
powerful that is context is everything
the control of context and and
filling every crack around the programs
with commercial with capitalism
is is a powerful context it changes
what's in that program you could have a
program as radical as hell if all around
it are commercials it's drained of its
potency
control of context is everything
so I I want to focus in on interstitials
and the we just talked about capitalism
so here's just a two or three examples
of what I mean and things that I see the
way that capitalist competition operates
is if you don't act sociopathically you
will go under once you get a system in
place that starts creating sociopaths
then they will create additional
rationalizations for the
sociopathological behavior capitalism
the system we have
is a disaster
everything
that has happened is the result of an
economic system that doesn't work for
the mass of the people you gotta get
this
capitalism isn't there in this in my
media Homeworld I have not seen a
television commercial
in its own context for decades
the only time I see them now is when
they're re-contextualized over into the
documentaries or Amy Goodman all these
things and when you move something from
one context to another it becomes
something different you know a thing is
where it is that's number one but these
these things just think about it for a
while the masses of people out there who
are seeing these commercials and in my
home world this is this is the exact
opposite of the imperatives of social
control this is what I see all the time
I've just picked three I could and what
I want to do and you can help me with
the bills I want to have 50 of these
examples to show in in in the next
lecture
okay take another one the ecosocial
crisis
the Apostle fuel industry is killing us
they have five times the amount of coal
gas and oil that is safe to burn and
they want us to burn it all many climate
science experts worry that if left of
their own devices the fossil fuel
extractors will push us past the brink
of cataclysmic disaster over and over I
want to hear that I want that to be my
Mantra I want to get up in the morning
and say to myself I'm going to sit in
front of that screen like a like a
meditation sitting
and work on myself with my media home
world as a as a radicalizing technology
of the self I want to hear that a
billion times Life as we know it will be
altered forever can you imagine the
broadcast saying this yep they carry out
their business plan the planet tanks if
the commons are privatized if they're
handed over to Exxon Mobil and you know
Chevron and so on and we're dead
okay here's another one I want to see
every day all the time
[Applause]
a revolutionary
what we're really talking about is
radical evolution
I decided to put this together and then
decide you know I'm not going to use
that word revolution ever again I'm a
radical evolutionary what we're really
talking about is a radical Evolution
mutation at the root mutation of the
root which is trenation not Revolution
which is a circle that ends up where it
began
here comes the new boss San Andreas the
old boss and anyway you know the word
revolution is Stone dead when it's a
campaign slogan to be the Imperial
president
everyone in this room would agree
America is an Empire
so to behave accordingly is to think
Imperial president especially since the
problem is not imperialism but
imperialists
there would be no Empire without
imperialists who create them and run
them
American Empire has been consciously and
deliberately driven as Empire by every
president since Teddy Roosevelt who when
asked how America got to Panama can now
responded we took it
so never say
president always say Imperial president
that you're talking truth just as we
always should say State media right
all right
in my media home world I want to
valorize heroicize The Whistleblower in
other words they're talking about
everything that's that's the exact
counter opposite of the imperatives of
social control so we build home rules
and life rules that that attract The
Whistleblower when the bill gets to a
certain scale it's going to do that like
you would it's certain that it's going
to do that because because notice what
is already happening but I want it to be
like this there's a it's official
it's ritualized
it's heroicized
yes
I see that you see I mean that what I
see there is that guy you know they're
pointing I see that he's got this huge
whistle right this whistle that like
fills the cosmos
you know whistleblowers
shove it in their face
we're not taking it seriously if we
don't
there will be no build if you don't do
that
and you're not shoving it in their face
you're shoving it on your face you're
building your home world that's
happening in your house and nowhere else
except everybody a billion other houses
are building their radical home worlds
and you put things out like this out
there
courage is contagious as Edward Snowden
said
citizen tribunals is something I want to
see all the time I want to pull down
citizen tribunals where all these CEOs
all these
I have to control my language who don't
get punished for the obscene crimes they
do
and I want to see them put on trial and
I want to see it every day every day
every day
it would be something like this
sorry these these clips just
I'm an amateur
Jane did that thank you Jane
okay
[Applause]
uh Heroes of the build I'm gonna
pass this by
and go to this
talk about meta design the computer as
meta medium and the social meta medium
in which we construct ourselves the
medium which gives us our Technologies
of the self right drawing them down from
the
from the commons
in namjoon
was amazing
this is 1965.
and see what that says
he's lifting it up right he's elevating
it from the individual artwork to The
Meta level the level of meta design art
for cybernated life
which I call secession from the
broadcast
and then you get to this other very
famous one or it's not a mirror helped
reality Hammer with which to shape it
if there ever was a time in which art is
in a position to do that at scale it's
now this is a heroic time for us that we
just grasp it understand it and move
toward it let me just make a couple of
points about that idea right uh I'll
just read here the separation of art and
culture from the social
inaugurates culture as a realm in its
own right and defines it as such the
very distance of culture from its social
context that allows it to function as a
critique and indictment of the latter
also Dooms its interventions to
ineffectuality and relegates art and
culture to a frivolous trivialized space
in which such intersections are
neutralized in advance that's a quote
from Frederick James and he said it
better than I could
a lot of people I heard today
after that are coming at that idea right
that's a problem how can you
doesn't art lose its potency if if it
becomes instrumental no not if you're
building an alternative world
not if you're building to leave
and but however that separation
represents the failure of what Jurgen
habermas calls the project of modernity
which he saw as the struggle to
integrate cultural and social
modernization so that culture would
guide and inform just
there is no progress under those
conditions and that has been implicit in
the great cultural and political
movements since the 20th century in
culture the historical avant-garde right
and in the social sphere the politics of
Liberation the theorist Peter Berger in
his book theory of the avant-garde
argues that the project of the
historical avant-garde uh in the 20s was
to destroy the social institution of
autonomous art and merge art with life
art was not to be integrated into the
existing life Praxis rather a new life
practice was to arise from a basis in
art
cultural Evolution was to guide and
inform social Evolution now of course
they failed those those futurists and
datas they they revolutionized all right
but not the world how could they have
I'm suggesting that
the build is about doing that we can do
that
and art becomes dangerous again this is
a rush and so going to text far from
being dead the project of the historical
arm guard is more alive today than ever
but it has nothing to do with any
particular style or aesthetic it's
possible only on an extra extra
aesthetic and supracultural level
through the alliance of the traditional
artists and the new artists as social
meta designer context provider however
you want to call it in this Alliance The
Meta designer creates the possibility of
Social and cultural autonomy radical
autonomies
within which artists create content in
contexts they control
of context is everything artists after
all create the most powerful and
poignant representations of being in the
world the most compelling visions of
possible worlds to be in
in the new alliance art is empowered and
revitalized in a way it never could be
without the control of context made
possible by the social meta designer as
much as it brings together art and
Technology the alliance of artists and
social media designer also merges art
and politics together they constitute a
new social cultural and political force
as a humanistic rather than merely
artistic movement toward creating a
scale what's avant-garde is the alliance
as such that pure social relation
regardless of its ethics or Aesthetics
one can view the situation aesthetically
of course but that doesn't determine its
avant-gardness is avant-garde status
what makes the alliance avant-garde is
the integration of Art and life it makes
possible building your media home worlds
this means that any kind of art no
matter how stylistically or
aesthetically retrograde it may be can
participate in an avant-garde phenomenon
because the work of art is no longer the
site of avant gardeners it's about group
expression and not self-expression
okay remember I said we were going to
return to that socialized toll-free
content surface and conduit now this is
where we do it this phrase we must
create on the same scale as we can
destroy
was coined by a woman named Sherry
arabinowitz in 1979
she and her husband kit Galloway changed
my life as much as Bucky and Heinz and
all those people when I heard that
phrase we must create on the same scale
as we can destroy I said [__] in one
sentence she encapsulated everything
I've ever wanted to do it's what World
game is about it's what creating a scale
is about
and there it was
there they are I shared a house with
them for four years
we're as close together as you can get
she unfortunately passed away some years
ago I miss her she was a some kind of
woman
Jane actually added this that's the fact
right we don't even know how that's what
Hannah Arendt was saying something that
could not not be known we can imagine
first we have to learn to create on the
same scale as we'd say that's part of
the build cultivating that and I would
say we even have to learn how to learn
it it's so huge right all right I use
that term emotional bandwidth and this
is the title of the book I'm doing on
the this is the title the telepresent
world of Kit Galloway and Sharia
Visionary Legacy for the internet you
can see what we're doing tonight is like
thinking the past in order to think the
present the future fall back to LEAP as
they say these are their projects you
may have heard of them some of them uh
hole in space is the most uh the best
known I want to talk about right now
coming up electronic Cafe International
but for those who have heard some of
them this this is their whole life
project that they went through it's
stunning The Vision here is amazing
uh right here at your Museum of Modern
Arts some few years ago you may you may
remember this exhibition participation
hole in space was the cover it's very
well known but it's not the most
important electronic fa is the most
important
this is the idea of a of you know the
most
Universal social space that Cafe the
local cafe and what they did and here
again model Builders if they're wherever
model Builders this is it and I'm going
to show you
you go into the space and using current
technology
all the ways in which people can come
together in so-called virtual space all
the modalities of Reading Writing
hearing and writing everything you could
possibly do
in a cafe situation this has nothing to
do with internet cafes get that out of
your mind and you will soon you will see
that
and we'll just understand what that
means as we go on here so from uh the
1990 to 2000
they did this experiment electronic Cafe
and International in which these two
people built
an international network of what they
call the electronic cafes the cafes in
62 countries where
we're part of it at its peak
so this was at the 18th Street Arts
Complex in Santa Monica
foreign
it's a place dear to my heart so much
Nostalgia is involved here
uh and it's uh it went from three
thousand square feet to 6 000 square
feet and then back to three uh one of
the things I did was have printouts on
the walls of the of the um connections
the two-way video connections I think
that was really smart so you could you
know it just doesn't like vanity you
know Vapor wear you look at it and say
oh that's that's what we did
and it was a beaut it was such a lovely
space such a comforting space to be in
and that's very that's part of it that's
a big part of it the um
the vibe if you will
and uh so they in those days they had
the telephone system was the only way
you could do affordable uh two-way video
so they had to do slow scan right and
we'll see these so that that means that
you get you get one video frame every
six seconds
they were modeling the Builder of models
you you work with what you've got you
know and that's what they had
sure they could have you know tried to
raise millions of dollars and do do
fiber optics but that wasn't real that
wasn't that's that's that's what
corporations do
and so uh
you'll see so I'm gonna show you first
they used art they said you know if this
space if if conversational video
conferencing space if you will can
accommodate art it can accommodate
anything because art pushes everything
in every direction so they focused on
the Arts as you might say the
acculturating uh vehicle for this space
um
always making sure that there was a
histogram right on the walls
and I'm going to talk about the
ritualization here this the
ritualization is incredibly important to
us today and we'll say why
okay so here we're going to get into
three or four of the modalities that
they did the first thing you're going to
see here they okay the the abstract idea
of people occupying the image as a place
right the image as Place how can people
around the world occupy the same images
place so just think of the technology
today with which we would do that they
only could do it with superimposing
uh the two locations into one image
place
people on the screen are all
they're just finishing an evening of
deaf poetry and our relaxing and having
Cafe conversation
here's a sample of
telecollabative music
the two percussionists uh up front are
here in Santa Monica the electronic Cafe
International and the three other
performers are at the electronic Cafe in
Copenhagen
[Music]
okay they pioneered the use of midi in
telecommunication space Mort sabotnik
across the stage as the hand moves in
this direction
notes notes and as it goes this way we
can hide it
the next one does patterns
[Music]
this is 1991.
[Applause]
[Music]
then if you add it over here in the
distribute first all the Hammers will be
moving so you'll actually see the
keyboard going up and down as I do this
and I'm not going to do it with a thumb
because I want all five fingers to be
playing I'm going to do it with the
elbow so as the arm moves like this it
goes up the keyboard the arm move like
this it goes down the keyboard Now
understand this is the first time most
people even saw this possibility
[Music]
thank you
okay okay
is in Santa Fe
Mort is it the Cafe in Santa Monica
they've got a laser disc of her early
classic
um uh video called violin power back in
1971 in the analog days where she was
using the violin as the controlled to
controlled analog processing of that
video so you get all the warps on it so
that was like 71 now it's 20 some years
later from Santa Fe she's using her
violin to control the playback of that
laser disc in which she is using a
violin to control analog processing so
it's just do a layer
so that's
that's this the original violin power
71.
[Music]
that's the slow scan video
uh coming in from Santa Fe the people in
the cafe are seeing her that way
controlling what they're seeing in the
cafe
[Music]
[Applause]
terrific now what you were experiencing
the violin sounds the pitches the
velocity
the loudness of the violin and the
pitches we're controlling all the
positions on the laser disc that's what
you were experiencing the speed of it
what what frame it went to the jumping
back and forth she was literally
performing the performance of her own
self on the violin and all the images of
choosing them as she went with the score
this is 1991 okay now midi control is
now midi controlling music
thank you
and they're doing
um piano Duo between Terry Riley and
Nice France and um David Rosenberg
every six seconds a new frame that's
Jerry Riley
[Music]
and he's playing the Disco beer remotely
so it's a piano Duo
no I'm sure this stuff happens I I
stopped researching this I'm sure it
happens all the time these days and a
much more sophisticated way but
understand they're modeling this with
what they had available to them this
hadn't been done before well everything
you're seeing here never had been done
in telecommunications space
um
[Applause]
91 before any most people never heard of
the internet Dance Again using the
composite image space
co-occupy a space
that will produce the the words that
you'll be hearing in this piece
I
ah very nice okay
I I
this was the only way they knew how to
model such a space and so they adapted
their Aesthetics to it being inside
another person's body was the thing that
they could do so everything was built
around that
[Music]
I I I
I I
was was
I was I
[Music]
was was
uh this was uh
1990. good to see you I can see you I
can see you just by looking at your eyes
I'm beginning to get a feel for your
brain and I'm beginning to get a sense
okay Barry says I have to stop and I'm
going to stop uh so so let me just
summarize this you would have seen we
would have gone from this to more
political kinds of things for example
exchange with Omar cabezas uh the
Sandinista leader and a lot of powerful
stuff you I was about to show you
the point I'm trying to no I mean hey I
I know I'm going on too long so I'm I'm
not complaining at all I appreciate your
your attention let me just um
what I'm trying to suggest here that
this is what I call a social heterotopia
right heterotopia hybrid space
physical virtual
it's also in the mind you know and I get
that heterotopia again from Michelle
Foucault I'm twisting it a little bit
I'm suggesting that the internet is
incomplete without being grounded
without being anchored in these
translocal community
places which like this
where my God if if there ever was a time
and what what they said was
this is a this is an open Laboratory
for public acculturation of emerging
technology
that's what they were doing that stuff
was emerging public acculturation what
is it good for for us not for the
capitalist
if there ever was a time when we needed
this
right
uh and so I'm suggesting that you know
this thing about Alone Together
everybody their face smashed into the
iPhone
this
we gotta ritualize this there has to be
these these places have to be ritualized
and where you're experiencing as groups
you are not jammed into the iPhone you
are together and you're together with
another group on the other side and
you're saying to yourselves we are
succeeding we're this is our home this
is our public home world and I'm saying
so the last thing I would have showed
you do it at the secession Cafe
what if all together we're sitting here
you know us and some place around the
world and we do The Whistleblower magnet
or the citizen tribunals or Heroes of
the bill whoever they may be
I would have made this point a little
more powerful than I am right now but I
hope you get the point I'm suggesting
that we need to do this this is
extremely important in Mass
radicalization
this is from Confucius
the way out is via the door
why is it that no one will use this
method
thank you very much
[Applause]